# America’s new dietary guidelines ignore decades of scientific research

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/01/08/1130905/americas-diet-guidelines-ignore-scientific-research-red-meat-beef-tallow/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/01/08/1130905/americas-diet-guidelines-ignore-scientific-research-red-meat-beef-tallow/)

*12:10 PM, Thursday, January 08, 2026*

The new year has barely begun, but the first days of 2026 have brought big news for health. On Monday, the US’s federal health agency upended its recommendations for routine childhood vaccinations—a move that health associations worry puts children at unnecessary risk of preventable disease. There was more news from the federal government on Wednesday, when health secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and his colleagues at the Departments of Health and Human Services and Agriculture unveiled new dietary guidelines for Americans. And they are causing a bit of a stir. Related StoryRFK Jr's plan to improve America's diet is missing the pointRead next That’s partly because they recommend products like red meat, butter, and beef tallow—foods that have been linked to cardiovascular disease, and that nutrition experts have been recommending people limit in their diets. These guidelines are a big deal—they influence food assistance programs and school lunches, for example. So this week let’s look at the good, the bad, and the ugly advice being dished up to Americans by their government.

The government dietary guidelines have been around since the 1980s. They are updated every five years, in a process that typically involves a team of nutrition scientists who have combed over scientific research for years. That team will first publish its findings in a scientific report, and, around a year later, the finalized Dietary Guidelines for Americans are published. The last guidelines covered the period 2020 to 2025, and new guidelines were expected in the summer of 2025. Work had already been underway for years; the scientific report intended to inform them was published back in 2024. But the publication of the guidelines was delayed by last year’s government shutdown, Kennedy said last year. They were finally published yesterday.

Nutrition experts had been waiting with bated breath. Nutrition science has evolved slightly over the last five years, and some were expecting to see new recommendations. Research now suggests, for example, that there is no “safe” level of alcohol consumption. We are also beginning to learn more about health risks associated with some ultraprocessed foods (although we still don’t have a good understanding of what they might be, or what even counts as “ultraprocessed”.) And some scientists were expecting to see the new guidelines factor in environmental sustainability, says Gabby Headrick, the associate director of food and nutrition policy at George Washington University’s Institute for Food Safety & Nutrition Security in Washington DC. They didn’t. Many of the recommendations are sensible. The guidelines recommend a diet rich in whole foods, particularly fresh fruits and vegetables. They recommend avoiding highly processed foods and added sugars. They also highlight the importance of dietary protein, whole grains, and “healthy” fats.  But not all of them are, says Headrick. The guidelines open with a “new pyramid” of foods. This inverted triangle is topped with “protein, dairy, and healthy fats” on one side and “vegetables and fruits” on the other.  USDA   There are a few problems with this image. For starters, its shape—nutrition scientists have long moved on from the food pyramids of the 1990s, says Headrick. They’re confusing and make it difficult for people to understand what the contents of their plate should look like. That’s why scientists now use an image of a plate to depict a healthy diet. Related StoryWe can’t “make American children healthy again” without tackling the gun crisisRead next “We've been using MyPlate to describe the dietary guidelines in a very consumer-friendly, nutrition-education-friendly way for over the last decade now,” says Headrick. (The UK’s National Health Service takes a similar approach.) And then there’s the content of that food pyramid. It puts a significant focus on meat and whole-fat dairy produce. The top left image—the one most viewers will probably see first—is of a steak. Smack in the middle of the pyramid is a stick of butter. That’s new. And it’s not a good thing.

While both red meat and whole-fat dairy can certainly form part of a healthy diet, nutrition scientists have long been recommending that most people try to limit their consumption of these foods. Both can be high in saturated fat, which can increase the risk of cardiovascular disease—the leading cause of death in the US. In 2015, on the basis of limited evidence, the World Health Organization classified red meat as “probably carcinogenic to humans.”  Also concerning is the document’s definition of “healthy fats,” which includes butter and beef tallow (a MAHA favorite). Neither food is generally considered to be as healthy as olive oil, for example. While olive oil contains around two grams of saturated fat per tablespoon, a tablespoon of beef tallow has around six grams of saturated fat, and the same amount of butter contains around seven grams of saturated fat, says Headrick. “I think these are pretty harmful dietary recommendations to be making when we have established that those specific foods likely do not have health-promoting benefits,” she adds. Red meat is not exactly a sustainable food, and neither are dairy products. And the advice on alcohol is relatively vague, recommending that people “consume less alcohol for better overall health” (which might leave you wondering: Less than what?). Related StoryAlternative meat could help the climate. Will anyone eat it?Read nextThere are other questionable recommendations in the guidelines. Americans are advised to include more protein in their diets—at levels between 1.2 and 1.6 grams daily per kilo of body weight, 50% to 100% more than recommended in previous guidelines. There’s a risk that increasing protein consumption to such levels could raise a person’s intake of both calories and saturated fats to unhealthy levels, says José Ordovás, a senior nutrition scientist at Tufts University. “I would err on the low side,” he says. Some nutrition scientists are questioning why these changes have been made. It’s not as though the new recommendations were in the 2024 scientific report. And the evidence on red meat and saturated fat hasn’t changed, says Headrick. In reporting this piece, I contacted many contributors to the previous guidelines, and some who had led research for 2024’s scientific report. None of them agreed to comment on the new guidelines on the record. Some seemed disgruntled. One merely told me that the process by which the new guidelines had been created was “opaque.” “These people invested a lot of their time, and they did a thorough job [over] a couple of years, identifying [relevant scientific studies],” says Ordovás. “I’m not surprised that when they see that [their] work was ignored and replaced with something [put together] quickly, that they feel a little bit disappointed,” he says. This article first appeared in The Checkup, MIT Technology Review’s weekly biotech newsletter. To receive it in your inbox every Thursday, and read articles like this first, sign up here. hide

