# 3 Things Stephanie Arnett is into right now

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/10/22/1125356/3-things-stephanie-arnett/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/10/22/1125356/3-things-stephanie-arnett/)

*06:00 AM, Wednesday, October 22, 2025*

Dungeon Crawler Carl, by Matt Dinniman  This science fiction book series confronted me with existential questions like “Are we alone in the universe?” and “Do I actually like LitRPG??” (LitRPG—which stands for “literary role-playing game”—is a relatively new genre that merges the conventions of computer RPGs with those of science fiction and fantasy novels.) In the series, aliens destroy most of Earth, leaving the titular Carl and Princess Donut, his ex-girlfriend’s cat, to fight in a bloodthirsty game of survival with rules that are part reality TV and part video game dungeon crawl. I particularly recommend the audiobook, voiced by Jeff Hays, which makes the numerous characters easy to differentiate.  Journaling, offline and open-source For years I’ve tried to find a perfect system to keep track of all my random notes and weird little rabbit holes of inspiration. None of my paper journals or paid apps have been able to top how customizable and convenient the developer-­favorite notetaking app Obsidian is. Thanks to this app, I’ve been able to cancel subscription services I was using to track my reading habits, fitness goals, and journaling—and I also use it to track tasks I do for work, like drafting this article. It’s open-source and files are stored on my device, so I don’t have to worry about whether I’m sharing my private thoughts with a company that might scrape them for AI.  Bird-watching with Merlin  Sometimes I have to make a conscious effort to step away from my screens and get out in the world. The latest version of the birding app Merlin, from the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, helps ease the transition. I can “collect” and identify species via step-by-step questions, photos, or—my favorite—audio that I record so that the app can analyze it to indicate which birds are singing in real time. Using the audio feature, I “captured” the red-eyed vireo flitting up in the tree canopy and backlit by the sun. Fantastic for my backyard feeder or while I’m out on the trail.  hide

