# Renewed US controls on AI chips for China could backfire

[https://www.eiu.com/n/renewed-us-controls-on-ai-chips-for-china-could-backfire/](https://www.eiu.com/n/renewed-us-controls-on-ai-chips-for-china-could-backfire/)

*04:32 PM, Tuesday, April 22, 2025*

Renewed US controls on AI chips for China could backfire

ForecastingGeopoliticsTradeChinaUnited StatesCountry Analysis

What’s happened?In mid-April the US government informed the country’s artificial intelligence (AI) chip designers and manufacturers, including Nvidia and Intel, that their China-specific AI chip product lines would be subject to export licensing with immediate effect. The US had previously restricted sales of the most advanced AI chips to China, and US designers and manufacturers had responded by developing AI chips for China-bound shipments that comply with US export controls.Why does it matter?The export controls are likely to introduce some challenges to the development and deployment of AI in China, but we do not expect them to be overwhelming. China’s technology sector had already anticipated intensifying restrictions on incoming shipments of chips designed and/or manufactured in the US, and many companies have maintained a stockpile. Chinese AI developers also work within these constraints; the emergence of DeepSeek offers a notable example of a newer model allowing for the more efficient development and deployment of AI technologies in the face of supply constraints. In addition, alternatives are available, in the form of lower-performance chips from US and domestic suppliers, even if they offer less value for money.Conversely, China’s AI chip production could improve at a faster pace. US options such as Nvidia’s H20 chips were already facing growing competition from Chinese chip designers like Huawei and Cambricon, which contract SMIC, a Chinese foundry, to manufacture their chips. The fact that US chip developers could only sell lower-performance chips will make Chinese-designed and manufactured chips more attractive. While constraints on SMIC’s production remain, such as access to manufacturing equipment, stronger demand is likely to accelerate improvements in production technology that would have otherwise taken longer.At a macroeconomic level, the export controls could in fact result in increased investment in AI and semiconductors across the Chinese economy (assuming that AI demand remains strong). We have previously highlighted that China’s big tech companies, state-owned enterprises and public actors are all experimenting with generative AI technologies and their potential applications. Increased investment will occur not only because lower-performance chip alternatives (whether Chinese or foreign) will offer poorer value for money, but also as a result of state-backed expenditure on semiconductor research and development. Considering the headwinds facing economic growth, we have already expected China to increase investment in support of key strategies and national security capacity. The drastic acceleration of decoupling between China and the US, with each country in effect imposing a trade embargo on the other, is forcing Chinese policymakers to pivot more quickly towards self-reliance.What next?Although we believe that the US and China will enter negotiations to de-escalate bilateral trade tensions to some extent later in the year, it is unlikely that US officials will use the export controls on AI chips as a bargaining chip. We do not expect the new restrictions to be eased, given that the intention to slow down (if not halt) China’s AI development has strong support among US policymakers.The analysis and forecasts presented in this article are drawn from EIU’s Country Analysis service. This comprehensive solution offers essential insights into the political and economic outlook of nearly 200 countries, empowering businesses to manage risks and develop effective strategies.

ForecastingGeopoliticsTradeChinaUnited StatesCountry Analysis

