# Nominations are now open for our global 2026 Innovators Under 35 competition

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/12/01/1128610/nominations-open-global-2026-innovators-under-35-competition/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/12/01/1128610/nominations-open-global-2026-innovators-under-35-competition/)

*06:02 AM, Monday, December 01, 2025*

We have some exciting news: Nominations are now open for MIT Technology Review’s 2026 Innovators Under 35 competition. This annual list recognizes 35 of the world’s best young scientists and inventors, and our newsroom has produced it for more than two decades.  It’s free to nominate yourself or someone you know, and it only takes a few moments. Submit your nomination before 5 p.m. ET on Tuesday, January 20, 2026.  We’re looking for people who are making important scientific discoveries and applying that knowledge to build new technologies. Or those who are engineering new systems and algorithms that will aid our work or extend our abilities.  Each year, many honorees are focused on improving human health or solving major problems like climate change; others are charting the future path of artificial intelligence or developing the next generation of robots.

The most successful candidates will have made a clear advance that is expected to have a positive impact beyond their own field. They should be the primary scientific or technical driver behind the work involved, and we like to see some signs that a candidate’s innovation is gaining real traction. You can look at last year’s list to get an idea of what we look out for. We encourage self-nominations, and if you previously nominated someone who wasn’t selected, feel free to put them forward again. Please note: To be eligible for the 2026 list, nominees must be under the age of 35 as of October 1, 2026.  Semifinalists will be notified by early March and asked to complete an application at that time. Winners are then chosen by the editorial staff of MIT Technology Review, with input from a panel of expert judges. (Here’s more info about our selection process and timelines.)  If you have any questions, please contact tr35@technologyreview.com. We look forward to reviewing your nominations. Good luck!  hide

