# There’s a lot of hype around perimenopause. Don’t buy it.

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/07/17/1140608/theres-a-lot-of-hype-around-perimenopause-dont-buy-it/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/07/17/1140608/theres-a-lot-of-hype-around-perimenopause-dont-buy-it/)

*05:00 AM, Friday, July 17, 2026*

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Perimenopause has entered the chat. Perimenopause—and its better-known relative, menopause—used to be considered taboo. Not anymore, thanks at least in part to TV doctors and social media influencers. Perhaps it’s my age, but these days, both my algorithm and my conversations with friends increasingly swing toward perimenopause. Menopause is defined as the life stage that occurs a year after a person has had their last period. Perimenopause is the sometimes years-long period before that point, which can also feature all the symptoms we’d typically associate with menopause. Related StoryWhy the term "women of childbearing age" is problematicRead next Today, information about perimenopause is more prevalent and accessible than ever. If you’re a woman in your 40s and you’re not feeling 100%, chances are there’ll be someone online ready to tell you you’re in perimenopause. And that you might want to start spending your money on blood tests, apps, and supplements or demanding hormone replacement therapy. But as regular readers might have guessed by this point, it’s not that simple. Perimenopause tends to start around the age of 46 or 47. It’s during this time that many women start to experience some symptoms like hot flashes, irregular or unusually heavy periods, or anxiety, for example. And it can be heavy going. “Often symptoms are at their worst in the perimenopause,” says Mary Ann Lumsden, former president of the International Menopause Society.

That’s because hormones can fluctuate wildly. Levels of estrogen, progesterone, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone can roller-coaster before leveling off after menopause. And that’s why, despite what some marketers will claim, there is no test for perimenopause. “You can’t interpret hormone [measures] because they change so much,” says Lumsden. “And that is quite normal.”

That doesn’t mean women should have to put up with symptoms. But exactly how those symptoms are treated is another topic that has been clouded by misinformation. Last week, I told a friend about some unusually bad pelvic pain I’d experienced. Her immediate advice was to find out if I was perimenopausal and, if I was, to request hormone replacement therapy (HRT) as soon as possible. If my doctor wouldn’t prescribe it, she continued, I should simply find another doctor who would. Related StoryWe can now use cells from dead people to create new life. But who gets to decide?Read next This line of thinking has been heavily promoted on social media platforms, says Paula Briggs, a former chair of the British Menopause Society who currently leads the menopause service at Liverpool Women’s Hospital. But it’s not helpful. HRT is essentially designed to top up or replace hormones like estrogen and progesterone, which naturally decline around menopause. There are lots of different drugs that can be taken in lots of different ways and at various doses.  While it does come with some risks and won’t suit everyone, HRT can be immensely helpful for many menopausal women. Not only can it help with many of the common symptoms of menopause, but it can also help prevent osteoporosis and maintain muscle strength. But these drugs were trialed in, and approved for, menopausal women, says Lumsden. They won’t have the same effects in perimenopausal women. “If you give standard HRT, it may well get swamped by [the woman’s] own hormone production,” she says. HRT can also cause abnormal bleeding in perimenopausal women, says Briggs. She’s concerned about the messaging on perimenopause that is being promoted on social media. Particularly worrisome, she says, is the way younger women are being encouraged to assume they are perimenopausal and seek out HRT treatment.

“It’s almost cult-like, this idea that everybody must have HRT,” she says. And then there are the supplements. There’s been an explosion in marketing for vitamins and supplements specifically targeted to middle-aged and menopausal women. But the evidence for these, too, is either limited or nonexistent. “I can’t see a mechanism for a lot of them,” says Lumsden. Women who take these supplements don’t always know what they’re getting. Some of Lumsden’s patients have told her they take testosterone supplements to manage their symptoms. But blood tests revealed no increase in testosterone levels. “Whatever they’re getting, it’s not testosterone,” she says. Related StoryIVF alone can’t save us from a looming fertility crisisRead next At any rate, not all the symptoms women experience in midlife can be blamed on hormones. The lengthy lists of perimenopause symptoms shared on social media include fatigue, brain fog, aches and pains, digestive issues, and more. “These do not link closely to the obvious menstrual cycle changes and hormone changes … across menopause,” says Nanette Santoro, a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Colorado Anschutz who studies menopause. If you’re experiencing any symptoms, it’s worth getting them checked out to make sure they’re not being caused by something else. My own pelvic pain, for example, is almost definitely the result of endometriosis—a condition that can be made worse by HRT, Lumsden tells me. At any rate, by the time women reach their 40s, many are already juggling care for children and aging parents, often while holding down a job (and dealing with pressures from societies that don’t appear to value older women). It’s an exhausting time—and not all of that exhaustion can be blamed on hormones. As Santoro puts it: “Attributing everything unpleasant that happens to a woman over 35 to perimenopause is not based on any scientific evidence.” This article first appeared in The Checkup, MIT Technology Review’s weekly biotech newsletter. To receive it in your inbox every Thursday, and read articles like this first, sign up here. hide

