# A new US phone network for Christians aims to block porn and gender-related content

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/05/01/1136739/a-new-t-mobile-network-for-christians-aims-to-block-porn-and-gender-related-content/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/05/01/1136739/a-new-t-mobile-network-for-christians-aims-to-block-porn-and-gender-related-content/)

*05:00 AM, Friday, May 01, 2026*

A new US-wide cell phone network marketed to Christians is set to launch next week. It blocks porn, which experts in network security say marks the first time a US cell plan has used network-level blocking for such content that can’t be turned off even by adult account owners. It’s also rolling out a filter on sexual content aimed at blocking material related to gender and trans issues, which will be optional but turned on by default across all plans. The network, which is currently being tested ahead of its May 5 launch date, will be run by Radiant Mobile, a newly launched mobile virtual network operator (MVNO). These operators don’t own cell towers but buy bandwidth from the big providers (in this case, T-Mobile) and sell to specific demographics (President Trump announced his own MVNO last year called Trump Mobile; CREDOMobile sends donations to progressive causes).   “We are going to create—and we think we have every right to do so—an environment that is Jesus-centric, that is void of pornography, void of LGBT, void of trans,” Radiant Mobile’s founder, Paul Fisher, told MIT Technology Review. A representative for T-Mobile did not comment on whether these content blocks violate any of its policies. In a statement, the representative added that T-Mobile does not have a direct relationship with Radiant Mobile but instead works through the MVNO manager CompaxDigital.  Fisher says he’s recruited a mix of Christian influencers to advertise the plan and has also done outreach to thousands of churches around the country, offering a way to have Radiant donate a portion of congregants’ $30-per-month subscription fee to their church. Fisher has ambitions to market it beyond the US in other countries with significant Christian populations, like South Korea and Mexico.

At least one piece of Radiant’s pitch will sound familiar: the idea that the internet is awash in toxic sludge. It’s powered by content and algorithms that are making us more sad, hateful, and detached. A number of efforts aim to fix that, including contentious age verification laws and a coming wave of lawsuits alleging that social media companies knowingly got young users hooked on their platforms.  Fisher is pursuing the nuclear option. He says Radiant is working with the Israeli cybersecurity company Allot to block categories of content, such as material about violence or self-harm. Some categories are banned by default and cannot be allowed even for adult users.

This includes pornography. Chris Klimis, a minister in Orlando who was recruited to be the company’s chief operating officer, says part of the reason he got involved was to offer Christians a real way to “do something” about what he sees as a pornography crisis in the faith. He was appalled by a recent survey showing that 67% of pastors have a “personal history” with porn use. And he worries his six children will come across porn on their devices, even if only inadvertently. “We’ve got to figure out some way to close the door to the digital space,” he says. “That’s what we’re trying to do.” The technology to do this blocking is a blunt instrument: Allot groups website domains into more than a hundred categories, which include pornography but also violence, malware, gaming, and in Radiant Mobile’s case “sects,” which includes websites about Satanism. If one of its users tries to visit a website that belongs to a blocked category, the page won’t load. That’s harsher than app-based content blockers like Covenant Eyes, a Christian porn-quitting app that sends notifications to your friends or family if you slip up; those can be worked around or deleted. “Blocking in the network is certainly not new,” says David Choffnes, a computer science professor and executive director of Northeastern University’s Cybersecurity and Privacy Institute. Such blocking is the backbone of censorship efforts by authoritarian governments, for example. But there are more benign ways it’s used too. US telecoms block particular domains known to be spreading malware and offer optional network-level controls to block adult content on kids' phones. What is new is a US cell plan instituting network-level blocks that can’t be removed, even by adults.  The trouble is that most websites don’t fit neatly into one category, leaving Fisher with enormous and subjective control over which are allowed or banned. This is most apparent in his effort to block content related to gender identity. Anthony Re, a sales director at Allot, says the company does not have a category specific to gender but that “LGBT content” tends to fall into its sexuality category, which is described on Radiant Mobile’s website as “sites that provide information on sex, sex and teenagers, and sexual education, without pornographic content.” This category is blocked by default for all phones, a setting that can be changed by adult account owners.  But if a news site starts hosting enough gender-related content, Fisher might not just label it as “press,” which is allowed, but also “sexuality,” thus blocking the whole domain to any phone with that category blocked.  Fisher illustrates the subjectivity of such decisions with a recent example involving Yale University. Its general website, www.yale.edu, is categorized by Allot as education. “But they have a subsection of one of their websites that’s totally focused on, you know, trans equality,” Fisher says, referring to lgbtq.yale.edu. Because it’s a distinct domain, Radiant Mobile is able to place it in the sexuality category and block it.

Yale’s main website remains unblocked, for now. “If we see [the LGBTQ content] on the front pages consistently of Yale University, we’ll block them too,” Fisher says. Managing website block lists is a professional pivot for Fisher, who spent his career not in telecoms but in fashion; he was an agent for supermodels like Naomi Campbell and members of the Hilton and Getty families, and he later hosted a reality show in which he found people in rehab facilities and homeless shelters and tried to turn them into models. He ultimately left the industry and now says he regrets the role he played in it: “Am I proud that I spent 35 years creating star models or star influencers? Not at all.” Related StoryMicrosoft has a new plan to prove what’s real and what’s AI onlineRead nextLast year, his friend and fellow fashion mogul Bernt Ullmann suggested he look at what Ryan Reynolds had built with his cell network Mint Mobile: It made buying a cell plan feel less like dealing with a utility and more like choosing a brand, and it had been acquired by T-Mobile in 2023 for $1.3 billion. Fisher liked the business model but didn’t have an audience in mind. Then came a late-night revelation. “God is talking to me,” Fisher recalls. “Do something in the faith-based industry.” He set out to build the first cell network that would let in only content deemed compatible with Christianity. Fisher says the company has received $17.5 million in investment from Compax Ventures, part of the company serving as the technical middleman between Radiant and T-Mobile. Roger Bringmann, a vice president at Nvidia, is Radiant Mobile’s lead investor and silent partner (Bringmann recently funded a new complex at Austin Christian University in Texas, which bills itself as “the university for Christian entrepreneurs”). To fill the gap left by all the sites being blocked, the company intends to offer access to a library of religious content, including AI-generated Bible videos. It plans to use characters like Cinderella, Tinker Bell, and others (it has obtained rights from the entertainment and media company Elf Labs, which has been amassing rights to hundreds of children’s characters). “Those characters were originally constructed with a conservative perspective," Klimis says. They’ll be used in AI-generated content alongside testimonials and devotionals.  Choffnes has technical doubts that the plan’s firewall will be as effective as promised, not least because “it’s really hard to come up with a list of every website you think is problematic.” But beyond that, he sees the internet, frustrating as it can be, as better open than closed. “I do believe in an open internet,” he says. “I also believe that a lot of the internet is toxic, but I don’t believe that this sledgehammer approach of blocking content is the right answer.” hide

