# Southeast Asia seeks its place in space

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/12/12/1129235/dispatch-thai-space-expo-southeast-asia-exploration/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/12/12/1129235/dispatch-thai-space-expo-southeast-asia-exploration/)

*06:00 AM, Friday, December 12, 2025*

__________________________Thai Space Expo October 16-18, 2025             ___Bangkok, Thailand  It’s a scorching October day in Bangkok and I’m wandering through the exhibits at the Thai Space Expo, held in one of the city’s busiest shopping malls, when I do a double take. Amid the flashy space suits and model rockets on display, there’s a plain-looking package of Thai basil chicken. I’m told the same kind of vacuum-­sealed package has just been launched to the International Space Station. “This is real chicken that we sent to space,” says a spokesperson for the business behind the stunt, Charoen Pokphand Foods, the biggest food company in Thailand.  It’s an unexpected sight, one that reflects the growing excitement within the Southeast Asian space sector. At the expo, held among designer shops and street-food stalls, enthusiastic attendees have converged from emerging space nations such as Vietnam, Malaysia, Singapore, and of course Thailand to showcase Southeast Asia’s fledgling space industry. While there is some uncertainty about how exactly the region’s space sector may evolve, there is plenty of optimism, too. “Southeast Asia is perfectly positioned to take leadership as a space hub,” says Candace Johnson, a partner in Seraphim Space, a UK investment firm that operates in Singapore. “There are a lot of opportunities.”

A sample package of pad krapow was also on display.COURTESY OF THE AUTHOR   For example, Thailand may build a spaceport to launch rockets in the next few years, the country’s Geo-Informatics and Space Technology Development Agency announced the day before the expo started. “We don’t have a spaceport in Southeast Asia,” says Atipat Wattanuntachai, acting head of the space economy advancement division at the agency. “We saw a gap.” Because Thailand is so close to the equator, those rockets would get an additional boost from Earth’s rotation. All kinds of companies here are exploring how they might tap into the global space economy. VegaCosmos, a startup based in Hanoi, Vietnam, is looking at ways to use satellite data for urban planning. The Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand is monitoring rainstorms from space to predict landslides. And the startup Spacemap, from Seoul, South Korea, is developing a new tool to better track satellites in orbit, which the US Space Force has invested in.

Related StoryRivals are rising to challenge the dominance of SpaceXRead nextIt’s the space chicken that caught my eye, though, perhaps because it reflects the juxtaposition of tradition and modernity seen across Bangkok, a city of ancient temples nestled next to glittering skyscrapers. In June, astronauts on the space station were treated to this popular dish, known as pad krapow. It’s more commonly served up by street vendors, but this time it was delivered on a private mission operated by the US-based company Axiom Space. Charoen Pokphand is now using the stunt to say its chicken is good enough for NASA (sadly, I wasn’t able to taste it to weigh in). Other Southeast Asian industries could also lend expertise to future space missions. Johnson says the region could leverage its manufacturing prowess to develop better semiconductors for satellites, for example, or break into the in-space manufacturing market. I left the expo on a Thai longboat down the Chao Phraya River that weaves through Bangkok, with visions of astronauts tucking into some pad krapow in my head and imagining what might come next. Jonathan O'Callaghan is a freelance space journalist based in Bangkok who covers commercial spaceflight, astrophysics, and space exploration. hide

