# OpenAI brings a new web search tool to ChatGPT

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/10/31/1106472/chatgpt-now-lets-you-search-the-internet/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/10/31/1106472/chatgpt-now-lets-you-search-the-internet/)

*12:58 PM, Thursday, October 31, 2024*

ChatGPT can now search the web for up-to-date answers to a user’s queries, OpenAI announced today.  Until now, ChatGPT was mostly restricted to generating answers from its training data, which is current up to October 2023 for GPT-4o, and had limited web search capabilities. Searches about generalized topics will still draw on this information from the model itself, but now ChatGPT will automatically search the web in response to queries about recent information such as sports, stocks, or news of the day, and can deliver rich multi-media results. Users can also manually trigger a web search, but for the most part, the chatbot will make its own decision about when an answer would benefit from information taken from the web, says Adam Fry, OpenAI’s product lead for search.  “Our goal is to make ChatGPT the smartest assistant, and now we’re really enhancing its capabilities in terms of what it has access to from the web,” Fry tells MIT Technology Review. The feature is available today for the chatbot’s paying users.  ChatGPT triggers a web search when the user asks about local restaurants in this example While ChatGPT search, as it is known, is initially available to paying customers, OpenAI intends to make it available for free later, even when people are logged out. The company also plans to combine search with its voice features and Canvas, its interactive platform for coding and writing, although these capabilities will not be available in today’s initial launch.

The company unveiled a standalone prototype of web search in July. Those capabilities are now built directly into the chatbot. OpenAI says it has “brought the best of the SearchGPT experience into ChatGPT.”  OpenAI is the latest tech company to debut an AI-powered search assistant, challenging similar tools from competitors such as Google, Microsoft, and startup Perplexity. Meta, too, is reportedly developing its own AI search engine. As with Perplexity’s interface, users of ChatGPT search can interact with the chatbot in natural language, and it will offer an AI-generated answer with sources and links to further reading. In contrast, Google’s AI Overviews offer a short AI-generated summary at the top of the website, as well as a traditional list of indexed links.

Related StoryWhy Google’s AI Overviews gets things wrongGoogle’s new AI search feature is a mess. So why is it telling us to eat rocks and gluey pizza, and can it be fixed?

These new tools could eventually challenge Google’s 90% market share in online search. AI search is a very important way to draw more users, says Chirag Shah, a professor at the University of Washington, who specializes in online search. But he says it is unlikely to chip away at Google’s search dominance. Microsoft’s high-profile attempt with Bing barely made a dent in the market, Shah says.  Instead, OpenAI is trying to create a new market for more powerful and interactive AI agents, which can take complex actions in the real world, Shah says.  The new search function in ChatGPT is a step toward these agents.  It can also deliver highly contextualized responses that take advantage of chat histories, allowing users to go deeper in a search. Currently, ChatGPT search is able to recall conversation histories and continue the conversation with questions on the same topic.   ChatGPT itself can also remember things about users that it can use later —sometimes it does this automatically, or you can ask it to remember something. Those “long-term” memories affect how it responds to chats. Search doesn’t have this yet—a new web search starts from scratch— but it should get this capability in the “next couple of quarters,” says Fry. When it does, OpenAI says it will allow it to deliver far more personalized results based on what it knows. “Those might be persistent memories, like ‘I’m a vegetarian,’ or it might be contextual, like ‘I’m going to New York in the next few days,’” says Fry. “If you say ‘I’m going to New York in four days,’ it can remember that fact and the nuance of that point,” he adds.  To help develop ChatGPT’s web search, OpenAI says it leveraged its partnerships with news organizations such as Reuters, the Atlantic, Le Monde, the Financial Times, Axel Springer, Condé Nast, and Time. However, its results include information not only from these publishers, but any other source online that does not actively block its search crawler.    It’s a positive development that ChatGPT will now be able to retrieve information from these reputable online sources and generate answers based on them, says Suzan Verberne, a professor of natural-language processing at Leiden University, who has studied information retrieval. It also allows users to ask follow-up questions.

Related StoryAI search could break the webDevelopers should act before governments fall back on blunt tools.

But despite the enhanced ability to search the web and cross-check sources, the tool is not immune from the persistent tendency of AI language models to make things up or get it wrong. When MIT Technology Review tested the new search function and asked it for vacation destination ideas, ChatGPT suggested “luxury European destinations” such as Japan, Dubai, the Caribbean islands, Bali, the Seychelles, and Thailand. It offered as a source an article from the Times, a British newspaper, which listed these locations as well as those in Europe as luxury holiday options. “Especially when you ask about untrue facts or events that never happened, the engine might still try to formulate a plausible response that is not necessarily correct,” says Verberne. There is also a risk that misinformation might seep into ChatGPT’s answers from the internet if the company has not filtered its sources well enough, she adds.  Another risk is that the current push to access the web through AI search will disrupt the internet’s digital economy, argues Benjamin Brooks, a fellow at Harvard University’s Berkman Klein Center, who previously led public policy for Stability AI, in an op-ed published by MIT Technology Review today. “By shielding the web behind an all-knowing chatbot, AI search could deprive creators of the visits and ‘eyeballs’ they need to survive,” Brooks writes.  hide

