# The art of advertising a new political culture - EDITORIAL

[https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/The-art-of-advertising-a-new-political-culture-EDITORIAL/172-299351](https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/The-art-of-advertising-a-new-political-culture-EDITORIAL/172-299351)

*11:27 PM, Thursday, January 02, 2025*

The manner in which our new Executive President is promoting the goal of rebuilding this country must be lauded. He is so genuine in his attempts to lift this nation from the depths of despair. And if we were to study people and the events associated with them, we have a president who doesn’t live one type of life away from the public eye and another totally different when pursuing his political interests. This makes living the life he has chosen so much challenging for President Dissanayake.

We watched this new government complete 100 days in office. There was much hope for the future at that juncture despite a few mishaps which were caused by some of his chosen ‘comrades’. One event that became the talking point, especially in social media, was some top figures in the NPP hierarchy attending a recent musical concert featuring an ABBA tribute group. The public questioned via social media circles whether the lawmakers had spent tax payers’ monies to gain entrance to the show.

This editorial writer doesn’t wish to harp on tax payers’ monies being spent by politicians on finding entertainment. What this editorial questions is whether these NPP lawmakers- who were at the show- are sharing the same vision as President Dissanayake who gives the message that lawmakers should hold back opportunities to celebrate and have fun till the country is stable and the people are freed from suffering?

Tickets for the show were priced at exorbitant rates and patrons had to purchase a pack of ten tickets to meet the requirements to have seats. The NPP lawmakers, by accepting official invitations for the show, give the message that though their leader or president wants politicians to suffer along with the country’s peasants during this recovery phase, that it’s okay for some politicians to be a part of a rich culture that busts money to satisfy the senses. Dissanayake didn’t attend the show. The host hotel maintains that the lawmakers were special guests.

We all know that President Dissanayake wouldn’t endorse his ‘handpicked comrades’ attending events where there is lavish spending. Yes, you read correctly; they are handpicked lawmakers.  Almost all these NPP representatives in parliament received the publics’ vote at the general elections because President Dissanayake endorsed their candidature in the run-up to the general elections. Otherwise most of them were unknown in this island; regardless of whatever paper qualifications they may possess. People trusted the culture and genuine nature of the president and thought that he wouldn’t make wrong choices when choosing his team.

As many as 42.31 percent of the voters at the presidential elections voted for Dissanayake. The majority of these voters represent the working class people or the peasant. Would this section of people have the money to purchase expensive tickets and attend a musical show of this nature? There is nothing wrong in buying a ticket and securing an expensive seat at such gala events, but it questions the commitment of NPP lawmakers as to whether they are genuinely willing to live the culture and lifestyle that Disanayake is promoting among his ‘comrades’?

Dissanayake has plenty of advertising and promotional skills to push his point that the present-day lawmaker must suffer along with people in putting this country back on track. Very often his speeches match the gloomy tone that runs through Ernest Hemingway’s novels. Past presidents like Mahinda Rajapaksa and Ranil Wickremesinghe never advocated cutting budgets and denying pleasures to lawmakers or the public. President Dissanayake thinks differently compared to them, so he must walk the talk.

Advertising and promoting can help paint different pictures. Dissanayake is painting a different picture in the political landscape. Let’s assume the president is paddling a bicycle. It is like telling that those who use bicycles promote health, but ruin the economy. Why? Because someone can say that when cycling becomes a culture, less cars are sold, petrol stocks stagnate and even car tyres lag in sales figures compared to bicycle tyres that are sold. Dissanayake must continue to paddle his bicycle and be aware of what his subordinates are up to. A good number of our past presidents were ruined by the actions of their close associates. Mr. President, be aware!

