# Trump 2.0 will weigh on functioning of US government

[https://www.eiu.com/n/trump-2-0-will-weigh-on-functioning-of-us-government/](https://www.eiu.com/n/trump-2-0-will-weigh-on-functioning-of-us-government/)

*03:00 PM, Monday, February 24, 2025*

Trump 2.0 will weigh on functioning of US government

ForecastingPoliticsAmericasUnited StatesCountry Analysis

What’s happened?During his first month back as US president, Donald Trump has quickly moved to achieve his stated goal of overhauling the US federal government. This has included aggressive cost cutting across federal agencies, in a process led by Mr Trump’s new Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE). It has also involved installing a slate of controversial cabinet picks, many of whom share Mr Trump’s deep scepticism towards the agencies that they are now meant to run. These events, which have unfolded at a greater pace and scale than we had expected, underline the growing risks that the Trump administration poses to the functioning of essential US government institutions.Why does it matter?We do not expect that DOGE will produce the substantial savings in government spending that Mr Trump plans. Elon Musk, the billionaire businessman who effectively manages DOGE, has said that he will cut US$1trn-2trn in federal spending by targeting “waste, fraud and abuse”. DOGE claims to have saved US$55bn so far, but has only published data to account for US$8.5bn (recently reduced from US$16bn after correcting an apparent clerical error). Independent estimates put the actual total in current savings closer to US$2bn, reinforcing long-standing concerns over DOGE’s transparency, accountability and effectiveness. Generating savings anywhere near Mr Musk’s target would probably require reducing spending under Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid. However, doing so would risk pushback from voters, and Mr Trump has already said that he will not tamper with these programmes.Instead, we believe that the overall effect of DOGE will be to jeopardise the delivery of essential federal services and functions. Cuts to staff and resources have been indiscriminate and hastily executed, affecting agencies in charge of a wide range of key responsibilities including public health, disaster relief, defence and security, tax collection, airline safety and the US nuclear weapons programme, among others. DOGE’s efforts to access sensitive government databases, which is unprecedented for political appointees at this scale, have also raised the risk of data leaks and privacy violations. The entire process has caused widespread confusion among government workers and the general public, not least because a host of legal challenges have occasionally halted DOGE’s activities. Although we expect the courts to continue to rein in DOGE, the stop-start nature of these cases will weigh on the operations of numerous government agencies as lawsuits slowly progress through the legal system.Many of Mr Trump’s cabinet appointments also look set to compromise the operations of important federal agencies. Against our expectations, the Republican-controlled Congress has confirmed even Mr Trump’s most controversial appointments, notably Pete Hegseth (defence), Robert F Kennedy Jr (health), Tulsi Gabbard (intelligence) and Kash Patel (Federal Bureau of Investigation). All of these picks have limited qualifications and hold unorthodox views about the management of federal agencies, including over traditional agency independence. These appointments reflect Mr Trump’s ongoing efforts to expand and consolidate presidential powers. Among a raft of executive orders, Mr Trump has given himself oversight over traditionally independent regulatory agencies, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission. He has also fired more than a dozen independent inspectors general—a move that critics argue violates the rule of law. Mr Musk’s involvement in the administration has also raised concerns over potential conflicts of interest, given that DOGE is remaking federal agencies with ongoing investigations or enforcement actions against Mr Musk’s businesses.What next?More lawsuits are likely to mount against the Trump administration as it continues to test the limits of presidential powers. A constitutional crisis, whereby the administration ignores court rulings against it, is not part of our baseline forecast. However, the risk of such an outcome is rising, especially as members of the administration, including Mr Trump’s vice-president, JD Vance, openly question the power of the courts to limit presidential authority.Beyond the courts, we expect that markets will serve as a check on some of Mr Trump’s most radical policy plans, including his approach to constitutionally defined separation of powers. Mr Trump remains highly sensitive to negative market responses to his actions, as demonstrated recently when he delayed a 25% tariff on Mexico and Canada. We expect Congress to play a more limited monitoring role, given that Republican lawmakers have so far done little to safeguard the powers of the legislature as Mr Trump continues to encroach on them.The analysis and forecasts presented in this article are drawn from EIU’s Country Analysis service. This comprehensive solution offers essential insights into the political and economic outlook of nearly 200 countries, empowering businesses to manage risks and develop effective strategies.

ForecastingPoliticsAmericasUnited StatesCountry Analysis

