# 

[https://dbsjeyaraj.com/dbsj/?p=86676](https://dbsjeyaraj.com/dbsj/?p=86676)

*08:53 PM, Monday, November 24, 2025*

Summoning of “Aruna”Editor -in -chief Mahinda Ileperuma  for Questioning  on 24 Nov by the CID Regarding a Front Page News Item Published on 19 Nov Condemned by Sri Lanka Working Jpurnalist Association and Free Media Movement.

The Sri Lanka Working Journalists’ Association condemned the summoning of the Editor-In-Chief of our sister newspaper, Aruna, Mahinda Ileperuma, to the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) on 24 November of this year, following the front-page story published on 19 November 2025 titled “Grama Niladhari certificate insufficient to obtain Police reports, approval of People’s Committee Chairperson also required”.

The association expressed concern that by summoning a journalist to the CID over a news report, the Government has ignored even the most basic standards of ethics and press freedom. “This action demonstrates the administration’s willingness to intimidate and suppress the media. The continued existence of media-suppressive laws from previous Governments further reflects this tolerance for repression. We believe that the ongoing suppression of the media will put the wider population at risk in the future. Therefore, at this critical moment, all parties who value the freedom of speech and the freedom of expression should unite in opposing this attempt at media suppression. We also urge the Government to immediately halt this action and govern in a manner that respects legitimate dissent and upholds the freedom of speech and freedom of expression,” a statement issued in this regard by them read.

Meanwhile, the Free Media Movement (FMM) organisation has condemned the summoning of Ileperuma to the CID to record a statement regarding a news article published in the paper. Issuing a statement, the FMM also called for the Parliamentary Privileges Act not to be used as a weapon of media repression. “Summoning Ileperuma to the Police is wrong. We have long demanded the abolition of the said Act. It is concerning that the Government – led by a political movement that once took to the streets against such repressive laws – is now attempting to intimidate or suppress journalists by using the said Act. The latest incident reported is the summoning of Ileperuma to the Police to record a statement. This follows a report published in the Aruna stating that, in addition to the Grama Sevaka’s (GS) certification, certification from the Chairperson of the Public Security Committee is now required to obtain a Police report.

“As the Minister in charge of the Police, Ananda Wijepala should not behave arbitrarily. If the news is incorrect, his responsibility is to provide a clarification and publish the correct information. If the report is accurate, he should ensure that the Police do not continue such improper practices. According to the information received, the news report is accurate. This is a matter of serious concern for the society as a whole. There is nothing wrong in obtaining verification from a Government official – the GS – for a Police certificate. However, requiring certification from the Chairperson of a community committee, who may have political or personal biases, is completely unacceptable. It is difficult to claim that such individuals can act impartially. Therefore, if Wijepala attempts to summon Ileperuma before the Parliamentary Privileges Committee or to the Police citing the said Act, it will set a politically dangerous precedent. The public expected an end to such practices. If the Police need information, they are welcome to visit him instead. Wijepala has every right to respond and the newspaper will provide him the opportunity to do so. The said Act – sometimes a repressive law and a shield for corrupt politicians to hide their misconduct from the media – must not be used against journalists or the public media. President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and the National People’s Power Government can fulfill their promise to eradicate corruption only through such reforms”.

