# Is Dr. Amarasuriya the Kamala Harris of  Sri Lanka?

[https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/Is-Dr-Amarasuriya-the-Kamala-Harris-of-Sri-Lanka/172-292451](https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/Is-Dr-Amarasuriya-the-Kamala-Harris-of-Sri-Lanka/172-292451)

*10:18 PM, Wednesday, September 25, 2024*

Sri Lanka now has her third female Prime Minister after a hiatus of 24 years. Twenty years is a long period of time from a political perspective. That was sufficient time to usher in change, to witness more women in the political sphere in decision-making positions and for them to take a lead to make a difference. But women’s representation in politics has been a long struggle. A struggle met with many patriarchal and professional challenges. But now, the tide has changed and Dr. Harini Amarasuriya has bravely accepted the challenge.

Dr. Amarasuriya’s appointment is a significant milestone in the political history of Sri Lanka. This is because her predecessors represented a political family. Even though credit needs to be given to Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike for becoming the world’s first female Prime Minister, people witnessed long queues to obtain dry rations during her tenure as well. She indeed was a woman of steel and retaining power became the constant factor among political hierarchies of yesteryear.

When Kamala Harris was elected the first female, African-American, Asian-American Vice President of USA, many applauded this appointment as it gave some hope for the immigrant, African-American community in the United States. Similar to female representation in Sri Lanka, the ‘black’ community in the States has faced numerous challenges to be where they are today. In the US for instance, a Vice President is usually selected to secure a voting base that a President cannot convince. For instance, a white President would elect a black Vice President, an old President would elect a young Vice President and so on. Dr. Amarasuriya’s appointment can also be viewed as a similar move to secure votes from the English-speaking, urban, liberal and educated voters, of course including women.

As per the Constitution, a Prime Minister is vested with the task of ‘commanding confidence in Parliament.’ The post of Prime Minister was created in 1947 under the Soulbury Constitution as the head of government of Ceylon in the Westminster system. In 1978, under the second amendment to the Republican Constitution of 1972, much of the powers of the premiership were transferred to the Executive Presidency as head of government and head of the Cabinet of Ministers in addition to being the Head of State. As a result, the Prime Minister became both a senior member in the Cabinet of Ministers and a successor to the President.

Dr. Amarasuriya’s role within the new government will receive attention for many reasons. Not only will she be a rose among thorns, but she holds an education qualification which becomes the cherry on top of the cake. But during a previous interview done with this newspaper, Dr. Amarasuriya maintained that an educational qualification alone doesn’t make one an accomplished politician. Someone could have educational qualifications and still be corrupt. But according to her, what matters most is the political culture in which most politicians have been brought up, and it is paramount that they represent a movement that works on principles.

Dr. Amarasuriya is also the Cabinet Minister for education, justice, state administration, local government, science and technology, women, children and youth affairs, among others. As the Prime Minister, she now needs to focus on certain priority areas in each one of these sectors that have been neglected for years. Educational reforms, establishing independence of the judiciary, providing opportunities for students in science and technology faculties to promote new inventions, giving more power to the women and children’s desks at Police Stations to apprehend perpetrators guilty of harassment, abuse and rape are a few of these priorities.

When the NPP Leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake made his entry into the Election Commission as the new President of Sri Lanka on the evening of September 22, a journalist questioned Dr. Amarasuriya about what critics say about the next government. She replied by saying that they don’t have experience in making the country bankrupt, but that they will gain experience in building the country. Let’s hope that the new government remains true to these words.

