# Voter apathy might produce a distorted picture of the electorate - EDITORIAL

[https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/Voter-apathy-might-produce-a-distorted-picture-of-the-electorate-EDITORIAL/172-295749](https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/Voter-apathy-might-produce-a-distorted-picture-of-the-electorate-EDITORIAL/172-295749)

*01:40 AM, Tuesday, November 12, 2024*

The enthusiasm in elections seems to have died down with the conclusion of the Presidential election held on September 21. It started with some of the prominent politicians who were very enthusiastic during the Presidential election backing down from contesting the Parliamentary election that was announced within a week after the Presidential election to be held on Thursday (November 14).

Over 50 members of the previous Parliament who represented various political parties wanted to refrain from entering the race for the next Parliament. Interestingly, there were those who contested the Presidential election as well among them. Some prominent political families have withdrawn from electioneering.  The fighting for the candidacy and preferential votes commonly known as “Manapa Poraya” within political parties was too not widespread this time compared to the previous general elections.

Campaigns by the parties and candidates did not commence straightaway due to this lackluster attitude. Almost all political parties contesting this week’s election started their campaigns only days ago. Yet, no cutouts of candidates, no posters in a big way, not because they are illegal, but it was a matter of enthusiasm. Violence has been natural in Sri Lanka with the height of vigour in campaigns during elections. Nevertheless, with the died-down interest this time violence seems to be a thing of the past. There have been no cases of post-poll electoral violence following the Presidential Election and no complaints about attacks on opponents during the general election campaign as well.

Executive Director of the People’s Action for Free and Fair Elections (PAFFREL) Rohana Hettiarachchi had stated that in spite of over 8000 candidates having tendered nominations, less than 1000 of them were campaigning. He had attributed this lack of interest to the strain on political parties, due to them having compelled to face two major elections one after the other. He had pointed out that despite hundreds of parties and independent groups that had tendered nominations having been allowed to open around 600,000 temporary election offices, only 9,200 such offices have been established.

There are two sides to this lackadaisical election campaigning. The positive side is that it prevents wastage of resources by political parties, candidates, voters and the state, by way of construction of massive tents and stages for public meetings, distribution of food and liquor as well as providing transport facilities for those attending such meetings. In fact, social media serves this propaganda purpose better than the election rallies. The died-down election fever also helps the law enforcement authorities to maintain peace in the country.

Yet, at the same time, it raises questions about people’s participation in the main event, the casting of their ballot, on Thursday. The voter turnout at the Presidential election was 79 percent and it was the fourth highest turnout in all Presidential elections in the country. However, if the seeming voter apathy towards the campaigns by political parties at the current election resulted in a low turnout, it sometimes might in turn result in a distorted people’s verdict.

Elections are a major pillar of democracy in a country, despite some leaders in our country having manipulated the process, by postponing them until the situations to turn favourable to their respective parties. People’s decision at elections must be well-informed, free and collective with their highest participation for the outcome of them to reflect the real public opinion. Political and public participation is crucial to democratic governance, the United Nations says. Hence the turnout in an election is an important and serious matter.

The slump in people’s participation in elections owing to civil disturbances is comprehensible and it is unavoidable as well. We saw such a situation at the Presidential election in 1988 due to an insurrection in the south as well as an ethnic war in the north and the east. However, sluggish participation of people in an election just because of lack of interest on the part of politicians cannot be justified, as it might reflect a distorted verdict of the people.

