# A nation’s people see power in the word ‘sorry’

[https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/A-nations-people-see-power-in-the-word-sorry/172-298441](https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/A-nations-people-see-power-in-the-word-sorry/172-298441)

*01:13 AM, Thursday, December 19, 2024*

Politics in South Asia is largely interesting when circumstances break traditional politics and ushers in a new ‘caretaker’ regime. This writer uses the adjective ‘caretaker’ because no regime has come to stay forever and must hand over the baton of administration to a new party once its term concludes. This government has to do the same. But for the record, this National Peoples’ Power led regime is no caretaker government –akin to the one that was led by President Ranil Wickremesinghe- and was installed in governance through the popular people’s vote.

This is why the NPP hierarchy has time and again stressed that the opposition out there is vigilant and is awaiting till the occasion arrives for the government to blunder. The recent political gaffe made by the Sri Lankan premier leaves much to be desired. The Premier had referred to China using the term Republic of China (ROC) when in fact ROC is the term used to refer to Taiwan, which is China’s arch rival. Mistakes are made because as humans we do make slips. And during such occasions an apology helps straighten strained relationships. But here, the premier hasn’t fancied the local media reporting on the blunder. Media circles here and abroad are buzzing with the news that the premier has blamed the ‘opposition and certain media institutions aligned with them on trying to create the impression that the government’s international relations are weak’. Government sources have maintained within their inner circles that all such attempts have been consistently defeated. Does this response mean that this regime is not willing to accept its faults and make amends?

Before this regime took over governance we saw how the power of the ministerial post and the chair of the presidency made people ‘insane’ or intoxicated with power to such an extent that they forgot their roots and the common touch. The premier is a sweet lady and still loved by all. This nation only hopes that she doesn’t lose the capacity to say ‘I am sorry’ when a mistake is made. People of this country who are not surviving on doles and have to work hard for a living cannot give this regime a honeymoon or grace period to settle down in office. These people who are gainfully employed want to purchase their essentials; especially their staple food, rice. We remember President Dissanayake making a pre-election promise that the new government would not import rice, but he has gone back on his words. The state now has elaborate plans to import rice. Okay, lawmakers do make miscalculations and mistakes, but then an apology and explanation can help them retain the trust of the people. The present regime must take note that caretaker President

Reading the minds of seasoned lawmakers

Wickremesinghe had long-term plans for Sri Lanka, but the average voter didn’t have the education to ‘read’ this seasoned lawmaker’s mind and understand the macro plan he had for the country. Given that the present regime cannot expect the average voter to read the minds of the hierarchy of the NPP government. The popular opinion of the people now is that this government is quite secretive in its dealings and that the state media is very selective when feeding the public with news and updates that everyone is yearning for.

Priority should not be given to wasting valuable time on checking the credentials of lawmakers who have entered Parliament. They are in Parliament because they generated the required number of votes. This is also not the time to highlight the amounts spent on lawmakers utilising the former President’s Fund. Time must be spent on finding out whether our lawmakers have received the proper grounding from parents, schools and universities that educated them. Grounding is very important because if you don’t have it you flunk in the face of a challenge. The best example for flunking or failing is not a former president putting on his running shoes and bolting out of this country during the chain of protests in the island nation. The best example for flunking is not apologising when one is demanded. Our lawmakers must carry two cards in their pockets and imprinted on them must be the words ‘no’ and ‘cannot’. They must not hesitate to flash them when unreasonable demands are made and when responding to questions in attempts made to conveying the truth. Just a ‘whack question’ for the regime would be ‘do we have enough rice for consumption purposes for the next two to three months? Yes or No? Please let us know!’

Sri Lanka’s lawmakers have made blunder after blunder while in office. We have angered China at the expense of furthering ties with India and vice versa. The same can be said about our dealings with Israel and Palestine. Handling China and India are akin to balancing higher education and professional sport; one has to be achieved at the expense of the other.

Can you remember when our cultural minister T.B Ekanayake wore worn-out shoes for a state function which saw the participation of Chinese President in the year 2014?  The minister was later quoted in newspapers defending his actions on wearing shoes which disgraced a nation and its government. But the best part of it all came when the minister said that people of this country are down to earth, hence he wouldn’t pay attention to what critics have to say about his worn-out shoes. Remember those years from 2005-2015? The year 2014 (the year this incident occurred) belongs to that era; the Mahinda Rajapaksa era. There was a one thumb rule and it was known as ‘rule number one’ which went ‘the boss is always right’. And those who begged to differ were forced to painfully learn the lesson of referring to ‘rule number one’. Sri Lanka has gone through protests, queues and two elections to change that culture. We need humble lawmakers who can accept their faults and read the pulse of the people. And that’s the only way to remain in power.

Actor Jean-Claude Van Damme is credited with the quote ‘If you’re not capable of making a mistake, you’re not capable of anything’. This quote can be ‘read’ in many ways. To grow, it is essential that you take chances and also make mistakes. We can extend this thought and say, ‘no mistake, no apology and hence no growth’.

