# Cloning isn’t just for celebrity pets like Tom Brady’s dog

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/11/07/1127692/cloning-celebrity-pets-tom-brady-dog-conservation/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/11/07/1127692/cloning-celebrity-pets-tom-brady-dog-conservation/)

*05:00 AM, Friday, November 07, 2025*

This week, we heard that Tom Brady had his dog cloned. The former quarterback revealed that his Junie is actually a clone of Lua, a pit bull mix that died in 2023. Brady’s announcement follows those of celebrities like Paris Hilton and Barbra Streisand, who also famously cloned their pet dogs. But some believe there are better ways to make use of cloning technologies. Related StoryGame of clones: Colossal’s new wolves are cute, but are they dire?Read next While the pampered pooches of the rich and famous may dominate this week’s headlines, cloning technologies are also being used to diversify the genetic pools of inbred species and potentially bring other animals back from the brink of extinction. Cloning itself isn’t new. The first mammal cloned from an adult cell, Dolly the sheep, was born in the 1990s. The technology has been used in livestock breeding over the decades since.

Say you’ve got a particularly large bull, or a cow that has an especially high milk yield. Those animals are valuable. You could selectively breed for those kinds of characteristics. Or you could clone the original animals—essentially creating genetic twins. Scientists can take some of the animals’ cells, freeze them, and store them in a biobank. That opens the option to clone them in the future. It’s possible to thaw those cells, remove the DNA-containing nuclei of the cells, and insert them into donor egg cells.

Those donor egg cells, which come from another animal of the same species, have their own nuclei removed. So it’s a case of swapping out the DNA. The resulting cell is stimulated and grown in the lab until it starts to look like an embryo. Then it is transferred to the uterus of a surrogate animal—which eventually gives birth to a clone. There are a handful of companies offering to clone pets. Viagen, which claims to have “cloned more animals than anyone else on Earth,” will clone a dog or cat for $50,000. That’s the company that cloned Streisand’s pet dog Samantha, twice. This week, Colossal Biosciences—the “de-extinction” company that claims to have resurrected the dire wolf and created a “woolly mouse” as a precursor to reviving the woolly mammoth—announced that it had acquired Viagen, but that Viagen will “continue to operate under its current leadership.” Pet cloning is controversial, for a few reasons. The companies themselves point out that, while the cloned animal will be a genetic twin of the original animal, it won’t be identical. One issue is mitochondrial DNA—a tiny fraction of DNA that sits outside the nucleus and is inherited from the mother. The cloned animal may inherit some of this from the surrogate.  Mitochondrial DNA is unlikely to have much of an impact on the animal itself. More important are the many, many factors thought to shape an individual’s personality and temperament. “It’s the old nature-versus-nurture question,” says Samantha Wisely, a conservation geneticist at the University of Florida. After all, human identical twins are never carbon copies of each other. Anyone who clones a pet expecting a like-for-like reincarnation is likely to be disappointed. Related StoryDe-extinction scientists say these gene-edited ‘woolly mice’ are a step toward woolly mammothsRead nextAnd some animal welfare groups are opposed to the practice of pet cloning. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) described it as “a horror show,” and the UK’s Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) says that “there is no justification for cloning animals for such trivial purposes.”  But there are other uses for cloning technology that are arguably less trivial. Wisely has long been interested in diversifying the gene pool of the critically endangered black-footed ferret, for example. Today, there are around 10,000 black-footed ferrets that have been captively bred from only seven individuals, says Wisely. That level of inbreeding isn’t good for any species—it tends to leave organisms at risk of poor health. They are less able to reproduce or adapt to changes in their environment.

Wisely and her colleagues had access to frozen tissue samples taken from two other ferrets. Along with colleagues at not-for-profit Revive and Restore, the team created clones of those two individuals. The first clone, Elizabeth Ann, was born in 2020. Since then, other clones have been born, and the team has started breeding the cloned animals with the descendants of the other seven ferrets, says Wisely. The same approach has been used to clone the endangered Przewalski’s horse, using decades-old tissue samples stored by the San Diego Zoo. It’s too soon to predict the impact of these efforts. Researchers are still evaluating the cloned ferrets and their offspring to see if they behave like typical animals and could survive in the wild. Even this practice is not without its critics. Some have pointed out that cloning alone will not save any species. After all, it doesn’t address the habitat loss or human-wildlife conflict that is responsible for the endangerment of these animals in the first place. And there will always be detractors who accuse people who clone animals of “playing God.”  For all her involvement in cloning endangered ferrets, Wisely tells me she would not consider cloning her own pets. She currently has three rescue dogs, a rescue cat, and “geriatric chickens.” “I love them all dearly,” she says. “But there are a lot of rescue animals out there that need homes.” This article first appeared in The Checkup, MIT Technology Review’s weekly biotech newsletter. To receive it in your inbox every Thursday, and read articles like this first, sign up here. hide

