# DHS is using Google and Adobe AI to make videos

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/01/29/1131938/dhs-is-using-google-and-adobe-ai-to-make-videos/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/01/29/1131938/dhs-is-using-google-and-adobe-ai-to-make-videos/)

*01:57 PM, Thursday, January 29, 2026*

The US Department of Homeland Security is using AI video generators from Google and Adobe to make and edit content shared with the public, a new document reveals. It comes as immigration agencies have flooded social media with content to support President Trump's mass deportation agenda—some of which appears to be made with AI—and as workers in tech have put pressure on their employers to denounce the agencies’ activities.  The document, released on Wednesday, provides an inventory of which commercial AI tools DHS uses for tasks ranging from generating drafts of documents to managing cybersecurity.  In a section about “editing images, videos or other public affairs materials using AI,” it reveals for the first time that DHS is using Google's Veo 3 video generator and Adobe Firefly, estimating that the agency has between 100 and 1,000 licenses for the tools. It also discloses that DHS uses Microsoft Copilot Chat for generating first drafts of documents and summarizing long reports and Poolside software for coding tasks, in addition to tools from other companies. Google, Adobe, and DHS did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

The news provides details about how agencies like Immigrations and Customs Enforcement, which is part of DHS, might be creating the large amounts of content they’ve shared on X and other channels as immigration operations have expanded across US cities. They’ve posted content celebrating “Christmas after mass deportations,” referenced Bible verses and Christ’s birth, showed faces of those the agency has arrested, and shared ads aimed at recruiting agents. The agencies have also repeatedly used music without permissions from artists in their videos. Some of the content, particularly videos, has the appearance of being AI-generated, but it hasn’t been clear until now what AI models the agencies might be using. This marks the first concrete evidence such generators are being used by DHS to create content shared with the public.

It still remains impossible to verify which company helped create a specific piece of content, or indeed if it was AI-generated at all. Adobe offers options to “watermark” a video made with its tools to disclose that it is AI-generated, for example, but this disclosure does not always stay intact when the content is uploaded and shared across different sites.  The document reveals that DHS has specifically been using Flow, a tool from Google that combines its Veo 3 video generator with a suite of filmmaking tools. Users can generate clips and assemble entire videos with AI, including videos that contain sound, dialogue, and background noise, making them hyperrealistic. Adobe launched its Firefly generator in 2023, promising that it does not use copyrighted content in its training or output. Like Google’s tools, Adobe’s can generate videos, images, soundtracks, and speech. The document does not reveal further details about how the agency is using these video generation tools. Workers at large tech companies, including more than 140 current and former employees from Google and more than 30 from Adobe, have been putting pressure on their employers in recent weeks to take a stance against ICE and the shooting of Alex Pretti on January 24. Google’s leadership has not made statements in response. In October, Google and Apple removed apps on their app stores that were intended to track sightings of ICE, citing safety risks.  An additional document released on Wednesday revealed new details about how the agency is using more niche AI products, including a facial recognition app used by ICE, as first reported by 404Media in June. hide

