# The vibe that a regime creates!

[https://www.dailymirror.lk/plus/The-vibe-that-a-regime-creates/352-295427](https://www.dailymirror.lk/plus/The-vibe-that-a-regime-creates/352-295427)

*01:06 AM, Thursday, November 07, 2024*

Foreign tourist arrivals is picking up here in the island, but the vibe generated with regard to the safety of Israelis here is quite negative (File Photo)

As former hunters, our generations who lived before us knew that picking up the vibe that exists around you decides whether you’ll survive in a place or not

By analysing the buzz in the political scene, Sri Lanka feels like a different place; we’ve seen few arrests of high profile politicians and the tightening of the law; because we have a history of only small fish getting caught in the legal net

Sri Lanka is an island, hence its citizens have to get accustomed to the influences of outsiders who set foot in here. These days are a buzz with the news that Israeli tourists holidaying here can be targets of terror attacks. This news is important from both a security and political perspective. Then, there is this buzz in tourism that foreigners are arriving in Sri Lanka to soak in its beauty and enjoy a holiday. But the vibe generated in Arugam Bay is rather negative. When you go and settle down in a place – even temporarily – it’s vital to see whether the vibe there is positive or negative. There is a buzz and a vibe both; hence don’t get confused now!

As islanders, who were hunters before civilization began here in this island, it’s essential that we pick up the vibe even when a regime is toppled and a new one is established. Communications experts and psychologists affirm that people should first see whether the vibe that exists at a new location threatens them! Are the National People’s Power (NPP) and its leaders through their actions doing things to unsettle the public? Why is this caretaker government not asking the Israelis ‘stationed here’ – thanks to overstaying their visas – to leave immediately? This is because their presence here is a threat to the security of locals in the area. As former hunters, our generations who lived before us knew that picking up the vibe that exists around you decides whether you’ll survive in a place or not.

From a people’s perspective, everyone has to plan for a NPP regime taking over administration of this country in the future. By the looks of it or by analysing the buzz that’s created in the political scene, Sri Lanka suddenly feels like a different place. We’ve seen a few arrests of high profile politicians and the tightening of the law; because we have a history of only small fish getting caught in the legal net. The latter seems to be changing.

Living in Sri Lanka is a quagmire. This is a bankrupt nation. The best brains in this country are leaving in search of greener pastures, the moment a door opens for foreign employment. However, despite such happenings, there are positive things taking place in this country. The caretaker regime led by Anura Kumara Dissanayake has appointed qualified people to top posts in institutes that are of concern to the state. A global telecommunications executive serving a multinational telecommunications conglomerate was also recently invited to throw his weight behind the government’s initiative to strengthen the country’s digital economy.

It’s enlightening to hear where Sri Lanka wishes to head in terms of its digital economy; invariably pulling along with it the performance of the telecommunications industry on an upward curve. It was not very long ago that the download speed of the internet was as low as 3.65 megabits per second. Now some telecommunications service providers are promising a speed of 100 megabits per second. But this is no big deal! There are companies in the world which have recorded internet download speeds of 400 terabits per second. Whatever the download speed of the internet, the bottom line is that it ‘in a way’ gives somewhat of an indication as to how most governments wish to control the speed at which individuals grow, educate and perform in their jobs.

Still in Sri Lanka there are other factors which decide whether an individual successfully sets up business and starts contributing to the country’s national income. The new president seems to be that person who’ll extend a hand to qualified professionals to work along with the government in his bid to lift this economy from the depths it has fallen into. But there are extremist forces here in this island who are quite uneasy when people from the minority communities set up large businesses and make their monies; not forgetting the employment opportunities these business enterprises create. But someone like AKD must be cautious of the fact when businesses set up here – regardless of who the entrepreneur is – whether they would destroy existing cultures and damage core values of a democratic country. Take for an example present England where hordes of immigrants settling down there are contributing to a breakdown of tradition and culture. The biggest drawback in immigrants landing there in large numbers is a newly created predominant work culture which is not in alignment with an existing British culture which thrives on Christianity, freedom of speech and freedom of expression. There are also concerns in England’s celebrated city of London that it would have a population comprising 50% Muslims by 2050. London welcomes expatriates, but it is concerned about the ‘work mind virus’ that has taken the place of religion. Maybe AKD can take a cue from London’s concerns!

When taking into consideration all the news items that this scribe has ‘picked from’ to fuel this article, there areconcerns about how this caretaker regime has come thus far during this short period in governance. AKD is more concerned about a clean economy, the number of professionals who can serve his government, but seems to think very little about the culture and the main religion that exists in the country. That’s the vibe he has created and we can choose whether we are going to respond to it or not.

But when the time comes for us to judge him, we will see whether the president applied himself in the best way possible to be absolutely right in the art of governance.

