# 10 Breakthrough Technologies 2026

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/01/12/1130697/10-breakthrough-technologies-2026/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/01/12/1130697/10-breakthrough-technologies-2026/)

*06:15 AM, Monday, January 12, 2026*

202620262026202620262026SCROLL TO EXPLORETHE 2026 LIST10 BreakthroughTechnologiesSCROLL TO EXPLORETHE 2026 LISTOur reporters and editors constantly debate which emerging technologies will define the future. Once a year, we take stock and share some educated guesses with our readers. Here are the advances that we think will drive progress or incite the most change—for better or worse—in the years ahead.Supported by10 Breakthrough Technologies 2026Supported by RubrikSupported byRubrik is the exclusive sponsor of the 10 Breakthrough Technologies 2026 and had no editorial influence on this list.Rubrik is a security and AI operations company that aims to secure and accelerate the world's AI transformation.Learn more here.Climate change and energySodium-ion batteriesSodium-ion batteries, made from abundant materials like salt, are emerging as a cheaper, safer alternative to lithium. Backed by major players and public investment, they’re poised to power grids and affordable EVs worldwide.WHERE CAN I FIND ONE?artificial intelligenceGenerative codingAI coding tools are revolutionizing how we write, test, and deploy code, making it easier and faster to build sophisticated websites, games, and other applications than ever before. Just be sure to double-check what they come up with.Who fixes AI’s mistakes?climate change and energyNext-gen nuclearNuclear power already provides steady electricity to grids around the world, without producing any greenhouse-gas emissions. New designs rely on alternative fuels and cooling systems or take up less space, which could get more reactors online faster.OK, WHAT’S THE CATCH?Deep DiveHow next-generation nuclear reactors break out of the 20th-century blueprintFrom molten salt to TRISO fuel, here’s how technological advancements could upend an old power technology.Read nowartificial intelligenceAI companionsEvery day, millions of people interact with AI chatbots. Some of them form what feel like close, personal bonds with the bots. There’s mounting evidence that this can be dangerous, and politicians are finally waking up.WHAT CAN WE DO?biotechnologyBase-edited babyWhen he was just seven months old, baby KJ became the first person to receive a personalized gene-editing treatment. A clinical trial is now planned, and bespoke gene-editing drugs could be approved within the next few years.IT’S EXPENSIVE, RIGHT?biotechnologyGene resurrectionGrowing banks of gene information on extinct creatures are providing clues to new treatments and suggesting solutions to climate change—and may help save endangered species.WHAT’S WITH THE WOLF?artificial intelligenceMechanistic interpretabilityNobody knows exactly how large language models work, which means we don’t have a clear idea of their limitations. But that’s changing: Clever research techniques are giving us the best glimpse yet of what’s really going on inside the black box.WHY SHOULD I CARE?Deep DiveMeet the new biologiststreating large language models LLMs like aliensBy studying large language models as if they were living things instead of computer programs, scientists are discovering some of their secrets for the first time.Read nowspaceCommercial space stationsSpace tourism may seem fanciful, but this might be the year paying customers can finally check into a room with a galactic view. The shiny new modules will also support research missions by scientists and space agencies.HOW DO I BOOK MY TRIP?biotechnologyEmbryo scoringScreening embryos for genetic diseases is relatively common practice in fertility clinics today, and it can give potential parents some peace of mind. Now, though, new startups are making bold claims about using similar techniques to predict certain traits, including intelligence.WHO’S DOING THIS?artificial intelligenceHyperscale AI data centersThe race for AI supremacy has supercharged data centers. Hyperscale AI data centers pack powerful computer chips into synchronized clusters that work like giant, high-speed supercomputers—sizzling hot, power-hungry behemoths pushing infrastructure to its limits.HOW BIG ARE WE TALKING?Vote for the11th breakthroughWhat’s missing from the list? Tell us what you think. Cast your vote before April 1, 2026.Reasoning modelsPowerful AIs that “think” through problems in steps often produce better answers.Artificial wombsSystems that incubate premature babies to improve survival rates may soon enter clinical trials.Humanoid robotsMachines designed in our image have sparked public fascination and substantial investments.Uncrewed fighter jetsTest flights are underway as both startups and major militaries invest in automated air combat.Please select an option before voting.SubmitThanks for voting!You voted for . Sign up for our daily newsletter, The Download, and be the first to see the results.Enter your emailSign upBy signing up, you agree to our Terms of Service & Privacy Policy.Something went wrong. Please try again.Thank you for submitting your email. Read more about your choice:By 10 Breakthrough TechnologiesAbout the ListMIT Technology Review’s annual list of 10 Breakthrough Technologies aims to help our audience know which emerging technologies are really worth paying attention to right now. Our editors and reporters pitch advances that they think should make the list, and we discuss and debate the merits of each over the course of several months.We look for breakthroughs that will have a broad impact and make meaningful differences in our lives and work. We give equal consideration to those that we think will have a positive effect or bring negative consequences. Every year, we have to pass on many worthy candidates. Here’s what didn’t make the list this year.This is the 25th year we’ve produced this list. Predicting the future is tough and we don’t always get it right. Look back through our archives to see what’s worked out—and what hasn’t. Or read this special analysis by an MIT researcher about some of the flops.Explore the archives CreditsEditorialSpecial projects editor: Amy NordrumEditing: Rachel Courtland, Niall Firth, Mary Beth Griggs, Mat Honan, Charlotte Jee, Amy Nordrum, Adam Rogers, Amanda SilvermanCopy editing: Linda Lowenthal, Teresa ElseyEngagement: Juliet Beauchamp, Abby Ivory-GanjaFact checking: Ena Alvarado, Lauren Colella, Kelsey Kudak, Rachael LallensackArtIllustration: Vichhika Tep, Daniel Liévano, Stuart BradfordArt direction: Mariya Sitnova, Stephanie Arnett, Eric MongeonDesign & TechnologyLead developer: Andre VitorioDesign: Vichhika TepProduct management & analytics: Allison ChaseCreative direction & product strategy: Mariya SitnovaCTO: Drake Martinet

