# Elections belong to the people - EDITORIAL

[https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/Elections-belong-to-the-people-EDITORIAL/172-294920](https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/Elections-belong-to-the-people-EDITORIAL/172-294920)

*01:49 AM, Thursday, October 31, 2024*

Tomorrow, we move into November – a crucial month owing to Sri Lanka’s General Elections scheduled for the 14th. Most independent analysts believe that President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s National People’s Power (NPP) will win at least a simple majority if not more. But other parties such as Sajith Premadasa’s Samagi Jana Balawegaya also believe the party could win a majority in Parliament. There is even talk among some politicians about impeaching the President.

November is also a crucial period worldwide due to the US Presidential Elections that is to be held on Tuesday, November 5th. Independent analysts and observers say that the two candidates – US Vice President Kamala Harris and Former President Donald J. Trump – are running neck and neck, and the result is too close to predict. Mr. Trump, as often and openly said, wants to be a dictator and this could change the world order because the former President has shown a special liking for Russian Leader Vladimir Putin, China’s Leader Xi Jinping, and North Korea’s Leader Kim Jong Un. Thousands of North Korean troops are reported to be undergoing training in Russia amidst speculation that they might join Putin’s war against Ukraine.

Since he was officially declared as President on September 22, Dissanayake has acted with responsibility and maturity on various issues with the help of Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya and Minister Vijitha Herath – perhaps the smallest Cabinet in the world. They acted with intelligence and skill that comes from years of experience when they tackled the crisis that arose after foreign intelligence reports indicated a possible terror attack especially on foreign tourists at Arugam Bay. According to reports, the AKD administration heard about the possible attacks in early October, but they kept it undercover while holding National Security Council meetings with the heads of the Security forces. The attacks were said to be especially directed at a few hundred Israelis who were holding a religious ceremony at a ‘Chabad House’ in the area. It was only when the situation was brought under control that the President called a news conference and told the story, though he said some aspects of it were still unclear and mysterious. It was much in contrast with how the then leaders handled the international terrorist attacks on churches and hotels in Sri Lanka on April 21, 2019. Whatever he did or did not know, President Maithripala Sirisena went to Singapore during that time, and though at least two commissions were appointed, the mystery still remains.

In other issues too, the President Dissanayake’s administration is taking a middle path. The President has said he will continue talks with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for further relief in the debt crisis.

On Tuesday (29), the President met senior officials from the Export Development Board and exporters where he had stated that the government was focused on significant issues such as lowering energy prices, promoting foreign investments and restructuring the diplomatic service to facilitate enhancing market access.

Dissanayake said that the government hoped to reduce electricity tariffs by a considerable amount within the next few years. He noted that the government’s aim is to create economic independence in the country and for this, the full support of the country’s exporters was essential.

Meanwhile, Sri Lanka’s application to join the BRICS as a full member did not happen in view of the group’s decision at Kazan to maintain the membership at nine for the present, Foreign Affairs Minister Vijitha Herath had told our sister paper the Sunday Times. However, he had added that Sri Lanka’s request to join the grouping as a ‘Partner’ membership country is to be considered. Mr. Herath had said that Sri Lanka is also to join the BRICS’ New Development Bank, which provides financial assistance to Member countries. Accordingly, the Cabinet is to soon approve a proposal to join the New Development Bank. The BRICS is an intergovernmental organization consisting of Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran and the United Arab Emirates.

As citizens and the sovereign people we have an important duty to vote, otherwise, as the legendary US President Abraham Lincoln has said, “Elections belong to the people. It’s their decision. If they decide to turn their back on the fire and burn their behinds, then they will just have to sit on their blisters.”

