# Middle East chart of the week: robust Gulf FDI prospects

[https://www.eiu.com/n/middle-east-chart-of-the-week-robust-gulf-fdi-prospects/](https://www.eiu.com/n/middle-east-chart-of-the-week-robust-gulf-fdi-prospects/)

*06:34 AM, Thursday, July 31, 2025*

Middle East chart of the week: robust Gulf FDI prospects

EconomyForecastingBahrainKuwaitMiddle East and AfricaOmanQatarSaudi ArabiaUnited Arab EmiratesCountry Analysis

We expect that foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows will slump on aggregate in the six countries that make up the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) in 2025. A near US$10bn contraction is being spurred in part by operational concerns, following the gradual build-up of tensions between Israel and the US on the one hand and Iran on the other during the first half of the year, which culminated in the short, sharp 12-day Israel-Iran war. The risk of spillover from this conflict, and possible future iterations of clashes between Israel and the US, and Iran, into the GCC was highlighted by Iranian strikes on a major US military base in Qatar. Although tensions have calmed, the latent risk of a regional conflict reigniting will underpin investor wariness for the remainder of the year.

Global uncertainty, underpinned by fluctuations in the US tariff regime, is also slowing investments as businesses hedge against growing geopolitical and economic risk. The corollary effect on global oil prices, which have softened from highs in the first quarter of 2025, is also expected to undercut FDI. Foreign investment in major oil and gas projects is growing at a slower pace, having peaked in 2022-24 when global commodity prices spiked. Investor confidence in non-oil sectors more broadly is also taking a hit, given concerns of a wider slowdown, reflecting the enduring dependence on hydrocarbons exports in particular markets, such as Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, to drive growth and provide fiscal receipts and export revenue.

The outlook for FDI in the GCC will strengthen markedly in 2026, with inflows rising annually in year-on-year terms through to 2029 (the end of our current forecast period). Business sentiment towards the Gulf will be supported by a softening of geopolitical risks, as regional tensions between Iran, and the US and Israel, gradually abate. The impact of lower hydrocarbons prices on investor confidence will also ease, as the Gulf economies prove more resilient than expected. This will be driven in part by rising oil and gas output, alongside robust non-oil economic growth, reflecting substantial progress with economic diversification efforts in recent years.

Most GCC states will continue to attract higher levels of FDI in 2026-29, owing to favourable regulatory changes, fiscal initiatives and the acceleration of critical infrastructure projects. Efforts are being made to harmonise business regulations and remove restrictions on foreign ownership and investment in the Gulf, slowly ending long-standing systems of preference for local investors, such as Saudi Arabia’s implementation of a new investment law in February 2025. GCC members, including Oman and Saudi Arabia, are also moving to expand their networks of industrial zones and special economic zones, offering tax breaks and other incentives to establish manufacturing hubs covering a range of sectors, from electric vehicle manufacturing to pharmaceuticals, chemicals and food processing.

Both regional and local infrastructure initiatives will continue to spur rising interest from foreign investors. Public-private partnership (PPP) models are being deployed across the Gulf to fund critical renewable energy, port, aviation and rail projects designed to boost their appeal as regional and global logistics hubs. This provides investors with reassurance on project feasibility, particularly as in some countries, particularly Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the UAE, domestic investments are backed by substantial government reserves and well-stocked sovereign wealth funds. Although regional projects, such as the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor and the Gulf Railway initiative, will continue to progress only slowly amid regulatory complexity and shifting political priorities, domestic projects will continue apace, with Omani ports, Saudi and Emirati rail projects and airports across the GCC expected to expand rapidly.

By 2028 Saudi Arabia will overtake the UAE in attracting the highest volume of inward FDI in the Gulf in real terms, reaching US$43bn compared with the UAE’s US$39bn. The kingdom is rapidly accelerating efforts to challenge the UAE’s traditional dominance over GCC FDI inflows, adopting sweeping regulatory reforms to liberalise the investment system and improve the business environment, upgrading infrastructure and building international partnerships in frontier, high-tech sectors such as artificial intelligence. Alongside vying for investment inflows, both countries will continue to compete for strategic economic influence elsewhere in the bloc through outward investments, contributing heavily to steady FDI growth in Oman and Kuwait (in 2026-28) in particular.

Foreign investment inflows will not grow evenly across the GCC, widening the gap between top-performing economies (the UAE and Saudi Arabia) and the remaining states. Although inward FDI is rising in Qatar, this is from an extremely low base of overall divestment from the country resulting from the boycott of the country by fellow GCC states in 2017-21, with inflows averaging just over US$1bn a year in 2026-29. This renders the country hugely dependent on domestic financing to drive gross fixed investment, with foreign investment accounting for just 1% of the total. Kuwait has a similar ratio of foreign investment to gross fixed investment, again owing to low inflows peaking at just under US$1bn in 2027. We forecast that Kuwait will be the only GCC country to experience a decline in foreign investment in 2029, when the risk of a return to long-standing political gridlock will spike should the emir hold a parliamentary election again that year as we currently expect, slowing already slow-moving efforts towards economic diversification.

The analysis and forecasts presented in this article are drawn from EIU’s Country Analysis service. This comprehensive solution offers essential insights into the political and economic outlook of nearly 200 countries, empowering businesses to manage risks and develop effective strategies.

EconomyForecastingBahrainKuwaitMiddle East and AfricaOmanQatarSaudi ArabiaUnited Arab EmiratesCountry Analysis

