# Qatar plays key role in Israel-Hamas ceasefire deal

[https://www.eiu.com/n/qatar-plays-key-role-in-israel-hamas-ceasefire-deal/](https://www.eiu.com/n/qatar-plays-key-role-in-israel-hamas-ceasefire-deal/)

*10:41 AM, Friday, January 31, 2025*

Qatar plays key role in Israel-Hamas ceasefire deal

ForecastingGeopoliticsIsraelMiddle East and AfricaPalestineQatarCountry Analysis

What’s happened?Qatar, together with US and Egyptian negotiators, helped to broker the ceasefire and hostage release agreement reached between Israel and Hamas that took effect on January 19th. Qatar has won plaudits for its pivotal role in helping to secure the agreement. We expect this to strengthen Qatar’s position as a key hub for diplomacy and mediation in the Middle East, which will be bolstered further if the initial deal holds, and Qatar will be able to help advance negotiations on stages two and three of the deal.Why does it matter?Qatar’s mediation efforts in Gaza form part of an international soft-power strategy, which seeks to elevate the country’s relevance to the international community. Qatar’s mediating role is enabled by its wide range of bilateral relations, maintained in a web of sometimes conflicting alliances, which the Qatari government leverage for hosting talks between opposing parties. The emirate’s success in helping to secure the crucial Israel-Hamas ceasefire deal should fortify its strategic position as a diplomacy hub and provide a backstop of global support for the small and vulnerable country sandwiched between regional heavyweights in the volatile Middle East region.Qatar had faced heavy criticism in recent years, owing to its controversial hosting of the political office of Hamas since 2011, when the Palestinian group left Syria. However, the office was opened at the behest of the US, and Qatari officials repeatedly argued that Hamas’s presence did not signify backing for the group but was instead a way of facilitating essential dialogue. In the aftermath of the Hamas attack on Israel in October 2023, Qatar’s emir, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, offered the then US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, the option of closing Hamas’s office in the Qatari capital, Doha. Mr Blinken turned down the offer as he viewed Hamas’s Doha office as useful for anticipated negotiations. Nonetheless, Qatar suspended its mediation efforts and agreed to expel Hamas’s political leadership from its territory in November 2024, when the US administration shifted its position on the issue after Hamas rejected a ceasefire-hostage proposal. Qatar has continued to play a key role and has clearly been effective in mediating the negotiations between Israel and Hamas after the expulsion of the latter’s political leadership from its territory.What next?Qatar’s foreign policy will continue to be built around counterbalancing alliances, which, in practice, entails a very difficult balancing act to maintain a broadly neutral position when dealing with competing factions and conflict hotspots. High on the list of foreign policy objectives in 2025 will be upholding the initial ceasefire and hostage release deal between Israel and Hamas in Gaza, advancing negotiations on stages two and three of the deal, preventing the situation in Syria from spiralling into chaos and easing tensions between Israel and Iran. Addressing these issues will be a major test for Qatar’s mediation skills and its status as a leading mediator in the Middle East during 2025.The analysis and forecasts presented in this article are drawn from EIU’s Country Analysis service. This comprehensive solution offers essential insights into the political and economic outlook of nearly 200 countries, empowering businesses to manage risks and develop effective strategies.

ForecastingGeopoliticsIsraelMiddle East and AfricaPalestineQatarCountry Analysis

