# Every generation gets the superhero it deserves!

[https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/Every-generation-gets-the-superhero-it-deserves/172-290552](https://www.dailymirror.lk/opinion/Every-generation-gets-the-superhero-it-deserves/172-290552)

*10:45 PM, Wednesday, August 28, 2024*

Votes cast at the upcoming Presidential Elections will either produce the next ambitious individual or another hero who’ll put the country in order (file photo)

Sri Lanka is a country where we see the occasional individual rise from poverty and then lift the rest of the clan out of misery. Such individuals are later hero worshipped. From agriculture to education, and in later years during the civil war, saw so many heroes emerge and etch their names in the history books of this nation. Mrs. Bandaranaike brought in the land reforms act in the 1970s to provide lands to cultivate for those who had none.

She was hailed by the downtrodden masses for how she governed the country despite these folks experiencing hardships in purchasing both groceries and essentials in their day-to-day lives. C.W.W. Kannangara was hailed for making education the right of the less privileged. The free education bill he presented ensured everybody had equal rights to pursue education.

In later years, we saw individuals like Ranasinghe Premadasa and Mahinda Rajapaksa (Both former presidents) pulling at the heart strings of people because both had a war mentality and they answered the call to end the war against terrorism. Going down memory lane to several centuries before that, Sri Lanka has records to show that it had a king with an extraordinary capacity for both brain and brain work. His name was Raavan (Ravana). According to Amish Tripathi’s book ‘Raavan: Enemy of Aryavarta’, the warrior Sri Lankan king had put a stop to external forces exploiting the island nation’s most frequented port. History has shown us that the people of Sri Lanka have got the leader they deserve during crucial times in this country.

Now, Sri Lanka faces another crucial chapter in her history as a nation. The islanders are gearing up for an election to choose its next president. Existing loans have to be settled and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has laid down strict conditions as to how Sri Lanka must handle its existing limited finances. From the perspective of the intellectual, Ranil Wickremesinghe seems to be the best choice to continue Sri Lanka’s upward journey from ‘nadir’ to what this caretaker president promises as zenith; the latter which is a target to put Sri Lanka in ‘the rich country club’ by 2048. The problem is that his speeches don’t appeal to the masses and Wickremesinghe also doesn’t trod on to election podiums like Anura Kumara Dissanayake (AKD) does. The Comrade’s got a swag in his walk and gives a fiery tone to his voice-at times when he must be stern-which can unnerve even the most overwhelming of opponent on the present-day political platform. But in reality, these are two ‘leaders’ of our times; each pursuing his own different political journey. They both believe that their election manifestos are ‘sellable’ during the post-election period.

At present, AKD has the political field well scanned. He has placed himself safely as an individual possessing political potential and a sizeable vote base to be counted as a winning candidate; come Election Day.

Time and again we get to see political giants surface, but it is only when people work with such individuals that ‘shortcomings’ and ‘character flaws’ are exposed. Shortcomings were observed when Gotabaya Rajapaksa was in office, for a short time, and when he failed miserably in administration. Despite experiencing changing times and trends in politics, we are still known to have a mind frame where there is a tendency to easily forget even the recent history of this county. There was a time when this defeated lawmaker with a military background said that he would make a comeback to active politics if the people wanted him!

The war that concluded 15 years ago taught us lessons in not to neglect or ignore the minorities. Here in this column, this writer is referring to the Tamil community. One of the present Presidential Candidates, a young one at that, affirms that the Tamils in the North will not be granted self-rule along with separate police powers. His father too maintained the same stance with regard to dealing with the minorities. Anyone, however big a hero he is, has to be labelled as ‘not existing in these present times’ if political strategies and ideologies are not altered to meet present-day political challenges and treat the minorities in a fair manner.

Even when reporting the sessions in parliament, the trend is to highlight-in mainstream and social media- what vocal lawmakers have to say during heated arguments using the choicest of language. Those who talk sense in parliament get the least publicity and remain unlikely heroes.

Almost all top candidates at the upcoming elections have made their courtesy calls on members of the clergy; religious leaders who wield political clout. Talking about the clergy leaves us with an opportunity to review our past. We must see whether the laymen that has visited places of religious worship over the years has made any attempt to upgrade themselves to be better human beings.

Till now, being labelled as a good human being is often viewed as a weakness and not as a strength; at least from a political context. This trend needs to change. We need to usher in the era of the enlightened politician and stop hero-worshiping the overambitious politician.

We had religious kings in our enriched history. There were kings who repented their violent pasts and embraced religion. King Duttagamini Abhaya (Dutugemunu) was one such ruler. History books of Sri Lanka show that Dutugemunu longed to see one of his best religious creations – Ruwanweliseya – be completed before he breathed his last. The stupa was hurriedly completed and a white cloth was spread over the construction to give the illusion that it was painted in white and ready for public viewing. The king was very happy and liked what he saw. That’s how ageing lawmakers must bid adieu to this world.

