# Israel and Turkey look to de-escalate in Syria

[https://www.eiu.com/n/israel-and-turkey-look-to-de-escalate-in-syria/](https://www.eiu.com/n/israel-and-turkey-look-to-de-escalate-in-syria/)

*04:41 PM, Thursday, April 17, 2025*

Israel and Turkey look to de-escalate in Syria

ForecastingGeopoliticsRiskIsraelMiddle East and AfricaSyriaTurkeyCountry Analysis

What’s happened?Israeli and Turkish officials met in Azerbaijan on April 9th for talks aimed at establishing a deconfliction mechanism amid growing tensions between the two countries as they extend their military influence in Syria. Despite underlying tensions between Israel and Turkey and conflicting strategic aims in Syria, which are likely to persist in the medium term, we expect the two governments to avoid direct confrontation there.Why does it matter?The talks come as Israel and Turkey seek to secure their interests in Syria in the wake of the collapse of the Iranian-backed regime of Bashar al-Assad in December and the uncertain political transition and fluid security situation that has created. Turkey is seeking to entrench its position in the country by establishing deep economic, political and military ties with the new regime and helping the country’s new president, Ahmed al-Sharaa, to stabilise the country and reconcile various factions. Turkey is seeking to secure its border with Syria, contain potential threats from Kurdish groups, encourage Syrian refugees to return home and ensure that Iran does not regain a foothold. In the longer term, the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, reportedly sees Syria as part of a defensive partnership that includes Iraq and Jordan ostensibly aimed at countering Islamic State (IS, a jihadi group) but in practice turning Turkey into a regional power.Israel, for its part, would prefer a militarily weak Syria that devolves power to its minorities, in particular the Kurds and Druze (who are viewed as less hostile to Israel). The Assad regime was technically at war with Israel, but even during the civil war in Syria, that border was Israel’s quietest. The change in regime in Syria has raised concerns that insecurity there could increase threats to Israel. The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, believes that Mr Sharaa remains a committed Islamist and a threat to Israeli security. Mr Netanyahu not only fears that Turkey— with which relations have deteriorated further during the Gaza war—will enable the new Syrian regime to assert control over all of Syria, but that Turkey also plans some kind of military presence—perhaps drones and anti-aircraft equipment—that would restrict the freedom of action that Israel has enjoyed in Syrian airspace. In the past, this autonomy was focused mostly on hitting military assets linked to Iran and its Lebanese proxy, Hizbullah.There have been no reports of direct clashes between Israel and Turkey, but the risk is growing. After the fall of the Assad regime, Israel—which already controls the Golan Heights, which it took from Syria in 1967—seized a buffer zone on the border with Syria, as well as the previously Syrian-controlled half of the strategic Mount Hermon. In addition to the expanded forward position in Syria, Israel also regularly carries out air strikes in Syria, mostly targeting army installations and equipment, and it has declared southern Syria a demilitarised zone. There have been no reports of a direct Turkish military presence in Syria, but in early April press reports emerged that Israel bombed three Syrian air bases in March that Turkish military teams were inspecting for possible use. Israel has warned that any change in the deployment of foreign forces in Syria, in particular the establishment of Turkish bases in the Palmyra (Tadmor) area, is a “red line” for Israel.What next?Although the recent round of talks did not produce concrete results, they indicate that both Israel and Turkey wish to establish a channel of communication, and the two countries have agreed to continue discussions. Turkey’s armed forces are among the most powerful in the region, and Israel’s resources are stretched on multiple fronts. Moreover, US support for Turkey will constrain Israel. The US president, Donald Trump, has indicated his support for Turkey’s position in Syria, and at a meeting with Mr Netanyahu in early April he instructed Israel to be “reasonable” in dealing with Turkey. Stabilising Syria aligns with the US’s goal of reducing Iranian influence in the region and withdrawing US troops currently stationed there to counter IS. However, the Trump administration has not shown that it is prepared to expend much political capital on Syria, leaving Turkey and Israel to resolve their dispute themselves, which increases the risk of military clashes.The analysis and forecasts presented in this article are drawn from EIU’s Country Analysis service. This comprehensive solution offers essential insights into the political and economic outlook of nearly 200 countries, empowering businesses to manage risks and develop effective strategies.

ForecastingGeopoliticsRiskIsraelMiddle East and AfricaSyriaTurkeyCountry Analysis

