# Energy Minister and accountability on subpar coal purchase

[https://www.ft.lk/columns/Energy-Minister-and-accountability-on-subpar-coal-purchase/4-788049](https://www.ft.lk/columns/Energy-Minister-and-accountability-on-subpar-coal-purchase/4-788049)

*01:14 AM, Monday, February 09, 2026*

Power Minister Eng. Kumara Jayakody

Why was Saman Ekanayake, former Secretary to ex-President Ranil Wickramasinghe arrested by the CID and remanded by Colombo Fort Magistrate till 11 February? His arrest on 27 January 2026 was allegedly for disbursing Rs.16.6 million in public funds for the then President's London visit, claimed by the prosecution as a private visit.

Wouldn't spending public funds on subpar coal purchase by the Energy Minister mean the same or more? With more direct culpability in importing substandard coal with public funds, should not Energy Minister (Engineer) Kumara Jayakody be sacked from the Cabinet of Ministers and immediately arrested, to investigate the corrupt deal on subpar coal with public funds? Shouldn't he and his cronies involved in importing substandard coal be held responsible for the total cost of the whole racket and also for expenses in clearing environmental hazards and compensating affected people due to use of substandard coal they imported?

This issue of importing substandard coal was first raised in parliament by D.V. Chanaka MP, on 21 August, before the 2024 parliamentary elections. He alleged the whole process of importing coal has been subverted into a scam. Contesting MP Chanaka's allegations, MP Ajith Perera of SJB claimed it could not happen under a very honest Minister who is against corruption and called for documented evidence. The gazette notification on import of coal was subsequently tabled in parliament by MP Chanaka who said, while Chairman of the relevant State Corporation had refused authorising the coal deal, had resigned from his post. Government had also begun investigations.

Three months later, elections for the 16th parliament were held and the new JVP/NPP Government was sworn in on 18 November. Campaign promise of clean and accountable governance with transparency was yet again reiterated and promised with more fanfare. President Anura Kumara Disanayake (AKD) was on record saying, within their ranks, there is none with any allegations on cheating, fraud or corruption. That they are the only political outfit who could establish "a clean and an accountable" Government.

That proud statement was completely ignored thereafter, President AKD opted to appoint a close ally of his, one (Engineer) Kumara Jayakody, as a "national list" MP and was then sworn in as Minister of Power and Energy. President AKD is certainly aware, this dubious character was removed from duty at the State Fertiliser Corporation way back in 2015, accused of a Rs. 8 million plus fraud. Meanwhile, on complaints made to the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC), it was reported in the media, he would be indicted for bribery by CIABOC.

Re-negotiations on substandard coal imports delayed due to 2024 parliamentary elections, began under this JVP/NPP Minister of Power and Energy, (Engineer) Kumara Jayakody. One year and two months after the JVP/NPP Government and Power and Energy Minister (Engineer) Kumara Jayakody swearing in, Opposition MP Chanaka on 8 January last, once again raised in parliament, the issue of substandard coal imports and their use at the Norochcholai, Lakvijaya power plant. He accused the JVP/NPP Government and their Power and Energy Minister (Engineer) Kumara Jayakody of heavy corruption in importing substandard coal being used at Norochcholai resulting in possible damage to its kilns, with smoke and ash settling on plants and fields and also humans being subjected to toxic environmental pollution.

The Environment Ministry too now accepts, use of substandard coal has resulted in substantial environmental damage in Norochcholai area. Deputy Minister of Environment Anton Jayakody had told the media, if substandard coal has resulted in environmental damage, relevant authorities would attend to them. He had also said, there is concern over the Sulphur content in them. If there are environmental hazards due to them, the Deputy Minister had said, that should be discussed with the Central Environmental Authority (CEA).

On the day before Independence, Minister (Engineer) Kumara Jayakody's statement to parliament proved the mediocrity of Opposition MPs who failed to raise required issues in responding. Based on media reports of parliamentary affairs, Minister (Engineer) Jayakody had told parliament, if as required, "quality coal" is not supplied, the Government will not hesitate to write off the supplier and get cabinet approval for "emergency purchases". The Opposition had failed to demand from the Minister what they would do with "subpar" coal already received and who would bear the cost for such supplies. They have failed to ask the minister what "surcharge" there would be on the supplier, for subpar coal supplied. They have failed to tell the Minister, cabinet approval for emergency purchases would only allow for "untendered purchasing" at open market prices and would not certify "quality".

While the Ministry has reluctantly accepted environmental hazards, there is no denial that subpar coal used in Norochcholai will not only have adverse impact on the coal plant, but would also adversely affect the environment, the greenery, the biodiversity and the people of the area. The Government therefore has to programme and implement environmental recovery measures and decide on decent compensation for affected people. Let them not be "dud cheques" as Ditwah victims were treated with.

What would the bill on total damage be that includes (i) cost of subpar coal and that of safely destroying them (ii) the cost of the total compensation package for the affected and (iii) the cost of environmental recovery measures? Not surprisingly though, this massive subpar coal import is not being treated as it should be, by the Opposition and the media that usually pulls out dirty stories with a nauseating chill.

All that leaves more responsibility with social activists, consumer rights and good governance campaigners. They need to demand for immediate removal of (Engineer) Kumara Jayakody from his ministerial post and his arrest along with his cronies for quick and independent investigations. Demand this clan repay all costs of the scam and environmental damage, for People do not need to fund massive scams with their tax-money. So there begins the campaign for accountability and good governance, if the conscious urban society wants to.

