# Coming soon: 10 Things That Matter in AI Right Now

[https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/04/14/1135298/coming-soon-10-things-that-matter-in-ai-right-now/](https://www.technologyreview.com/2026/04/14/1135298/coming-soon-10-things-that-matter-in-ai-right-now/)

*07:00 AM, Tuesday, April 14, 2026*

Each year we compile our 10 Breakthrough Technologies list, featuring our educated predictions for which technologies will have the biggest impact on how we live and work. This year, however, we had a dilemma. While our final picks encompass all our core coverage areas (energy, AI, and biotech, plus a few more), our 2026 list was harder to wrangle than normal. Why? We had so many worthy AI candidates we couldn’t fit them all in! (The ones that made it were AI companions, mechanistic interpretability, generative coding, and hyperscale data centers.) Many great ideas fell by the wayside to keep the list as wide-ranging as possible. Related Story10 Breakthrough Technologies 2026Read nextWell, that got us thinking: What if we made an entirely new list that was all about AI? We got excited about that idea—and before we knew it we had the beginnings of what we’re calling 10 Things That Matter in AI Right Now. It’s an entirely new annual list that we’re proud to be publishing for the first time on April 21, 2026. We’ll unveil it on stage for attendees at our signature AI conference, EmTech AI, held on MIT’s campus (it’s not too late to get tickets), and then publish the list online later that day. The process for coming up with the list was similar to the way we pick our 10 Breakthrough Technologies. We petitioned our AI team of reporters and editors to propose ideas, put them all in a document, and engaged in some robust discussion. Eventually, we voted for our favorites and whittled the long list down to a final 10.

But there’s a slight difference between this list and our 10 Breakthrough Technologies. AI is already such a big part of our lives that we didn’t want to restrict ourselves to nominating only technologies. Instead, we wanted to put together a definitive annual list that highlights what we believe are the biggest ideas, topics, and research directions in AI right now. So yes, it will include cutting-edge AI technologies, but it will also feature other trends and developments in AI that we want to bring to our subscribers’ attention. Think of it as a sneak peek inside the collective brain of our crack AI reporting team: These are the things that our reporters will be watching this year. We intend to follow the items on this list really closely, and you will see it reflected in the news and feature stories we publish in 2026. For us, 10 Things That Matter in AI Right Now is a guide to how we view the current AI landscape. It will be a source of discussion, debate, and maybe some arguments! We are so excited to share it with you on April 21. If you want to be among the first to see it—join us at EmTech AI or become a subscriber to livestream the announcement. hide

